So do my agenda for
thank you.
Might help if you actually turn off, turn on your camera.
I think we have,
Well, um, I thought I had, I don't know.
It's plugged in. Is is the sound on?
Yes, the sound is definitely on.
Uh, that is your profession.
I, I pushed all the buttons, so I don't Oh,
I don't, how do I change it?
I'm, I'm not a, oh, here we go. Start video.
Is that working? Oh
Yeah. Good
Look.
Fantastic. I'm an old fart,
but I can deal with this technology
Every day. Thank
you, Tim, for coming to the senate committee.
Uh, you have, uh, 10 minutes, whereas,
Oh, well good morning everyone.
Thank you for having me. Um, so I'm speaking on behalf
of Mount Morgan, rate payers, residents, and retailers.
I'm a retired engineer from Pepper moa
and that's Tom Rutherford's electorate. Is Tom here today?
Uh, he is, but we have had to, uh,
break into subcommittees because we had many submissions.
So he's not on this committee today? Not,
Not this one. He's on the
other one. Oh,
Oh, okay. Right.
Anyway, look, first of all, some general comments.
There are major problems with councils all over New Zealand,
which is why I've submitted.
We've got unsustainable rate, increases, bad management,
bad governance, bad legislation, legislation, costs
and spending are out of control.
And this is a general problem.
It's not just one single council, it's all over the country.
Sorry. Um, so there's serious structural
and systemic problems which need to be addressed
and government needs to do their pit,
but to help solve the problem, just tinkering
with the legislation, I don't think is enough.
I mean, as an engineer, first thing you need
to do is understand the problem
and the causes of the problems,
and then formulate a solution.
If you just start meddling
with things without understanding the problems,
you're actually gonna make things worse.
So first I've got two main subjects.
First one is the council organization.
And, and really I don't have all the answers here.
So I suggest
that the government actually performs a deep review
of the councils to work out what the problems are
and also identify the causes.
Now you need to get some pe people with good experience on
that review committee, not just people with credentials
or political connections.
And then you can use the results of that review to formulate
what your response should be, what changes you make
to the legislation.
So some general comments, I mean,
the government dumps requirements and costs on council.
The legislation's overly prescriptive. It's micromanaging.
It needs to be streamlined and focused on what is required
and what will give effective results.
There's too much focus on marketization
or business type management that's not working.
Council management have too much power
relative to the elected members.
Most elected members are ineffective
and the councils craft their policies
to allow them to do what they want.
There's no effective oversight.
The ombudsman and the auditor general or ineffective.
There's no clear focus
by government on the purpose of councils.
All sorts of things get dumped.
And, and why do we need highly paid
but ineffective chief executives?
Why do we need performance based contracts?
They don't seem to work. Why do we have
to have five year contracts?
There's not an effective, um, review process
for the chief executives or the council organizations.
So what we've got is councils that are dominated
by professional management class.
So they've got general management credentials,
but usually without any actual competence, they're not able
to make good decisions.
They're not able to manage effectively.
They're not competent to run councils effectively,
certainly in Targa.
So what you've got and all the councils across the country
is an expensive layer of bureaucrats
that are not doing very much.
And you've got the same problem with government departments.
So business theory doesn't work.
And just this, I know this isn't part of the your brief,
but you see you've got the same problem in schools.
I mean, you've just a repealing NCA,
which was an education theory thing,
which also doesn't work.
Second thing I wanted to get onto was the Treaty of Wgi.
Now, article three
of the treaty grants Maori the same rights
and privileges as crown subjects, essentially citizenship.
Now the opposite of that is
that all New Zealanders should have the same rights
and privileges as Maori.
There's no grant of extra privileges
to Maori and the treaty.
So all New Zealand citizens, including Maori,
should have equal rights under the law.
All New Zealanders should be treated equally.
There should be no extra or special rights for Maori
or for any other special interest group.
Now, bring this up. 'cause treaty issues cause
huge problems for council.
They create extra costs
and they also interfere with effective management.
Now, section 41 3 of the LGA states
that a governing body of a local authority is responsible
and democratically accountable for the decision making
of the local authority.
So governance clearly here is defined
as the responsibility to make decisions.
Also, decisions must be democratic.
But the LGA has inserted Maori into the decision making
process, creating co-governance, and that's not democratic
or equal or in accordance with Section 41 3.
So Maori are already able
to use the same democratic processes
as all other New Zealanders.
So there's no need to create extra processes
that are exclusive to Maori.
There should be no special treatment for Maori
that is not extended equally to all New Zealanders
and TGI knowledge shouldn't have any special place in
New Zealand legislation either.
All cultural beliefs should be equal
and have the same status.
So I think I'm asking
that all ma specific clauses should either be removed
or applied equally to all New Zealanders.
So I'm using example Schedule 11 rates relief on Maori land.
Now look, as a rate payer,
all New Zealanders would love rates relief.
So granting rates relief
to one group pushes an extra burden onto other rate payers.
So there should be no special treatment of Maori
or any other group, um, regarding rates.
So I'm asking that rates relief
Maori should either be repealed
or it should apply equally to all New Zealanders.
So Maori should be contributing to rates and taxes.
Equally with all other New Zealanders.
Maori business makes up about 20%
of the New Zealand economy,
and Maori should not be a special class under the law.
Now these are some specific clauses from Schedule 11.
Um, clause two B, all rate payers would like
to be protected from losing hereditary ownership of land,
not just Maori two C.
All rate payers would like
to be protected from losing their properties
because of rates 2D all rate payers would like
to be subsidized to develop the economic use of their land.
Two e all rate payers would like their cultural beliefs
to be subsidized.
Question two f all rate payers would like
to be subsidized to develop housing.
So all rate payers in New Zealand would like the same
special treatment and schedule 11.
So Schedule 11 should either be applied equally
to everybody in New Zealand or it should be repealed.
And if it is applied, it should be government funded,
not rate payer funded.
If you just push it onto rate payers,
what you're doing is letting one group of rate payers off
and putting an extra burden on other rate payers.
And of course, part of what
this is about is our rates are too high already.
So that's the end of my spiel.
I dunno whether you have any questions.
Thank you. Anyone? Yes, Vanessa Vani. So
Vani, thank you Madam Vani.
Hi. Uh, and thank you very much, Tim.
Um, I was just curious what your view of the application
of section 20 of the Bill of Rights Act would be, um,
which is of course the section that Preve provides
for protection of minor minority rights.
Um, well, I I don't know that that act, I,
so I I can't really, all I would say in general is that one
of the problems with rights is
that rights compete with each other.
And then you have the problem of which right has ascendancy.
So do we all have rights in New Zealand to be equal
before the law or do some groups have
more rights than others?
Um, I mean, I think that's one
of the shortcomings on focusing on rights
instead of a rule of law.
And instead of a rule of equality under the law, I mean,
you see the same thing whose rights are more important
for transgender people to use women's bathrooms
or for women to, to be able to have one minute left
Question.
There's one minute left. Okay. Uh, any other question?
Yeah, look. Um, thanks Tim.
I've got one question and that's around the, um,
the chief executive and the
appointment of the chief executive.
One of the bits in the legislation is
to say at the moment they get five years plus,
you can then go for another two without the council can then
go for another two without, um, uh, going out
to advertising, going out to the market.
The proposal is to go to five, given the comments
that you've made about the, um, the power of the,
the executive got any comments on whether
you think that's a good idea or not?
Oh, you mean pushing the,
you're talking about pushing the extension out to five?
Yes. Yes.
I, I, um,
two is not too bad.
The problem isn't the, not just the length of his stay,
but also you've got various things like the elected members
only employ the chief executive.
They don't employ anybody else.
Um, so what,
how it works in Taronga is essentially the chief executive
can basically shut the electorate elected members out
of access to the council staff if he wants to.
And Western Bay of Plenty council,
if he just had a huge problem with that,
with their previous chief executive
who fortunately has resigned.
Um,
Okay, So, yeah.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
An idea can, we can have a long discussion about that,
but we'll, thank you so much for making submission
For hours. Look, thank
you for, um, thank you for listening.
Thanks, Tim. Thank you. Okay. Cheers. Bye. We'll
Now go to the Aura,
our New Zealand Climate and Health Council.
Uh, welcome Mar,
Have 10 minutes. Can everybody hear me?
Yes. 10
Minutes. Great. Okay. I
was that my, um, my mic was gonna not work.
Okay. Koto, um, good morning committee members.
My name is Marni Prickett.
I'm coordinator of auditor, the,
the Al New Zealand Climate and Health Council.
And with me is Dr.
Summer Wright, who is our convener
and our executive, um, board member.
AYA is an incorporated society.
It represents over 1000 health professionals
and organizations working on rapid, equitable,
and regenerative responses to climate change.
Our members are doctors, they are nurses,
they are other medical staff
and healthcare workers, as well as health researchers,
policy makers, and other health organizations.
Um, and collectively.
Collectively, we are urging our political leaders,
including, um, the select committee, uh, to recognize
that climate change and health can
and should be addressed together
to achieve the greatest benefit
to our communities and society.
Climate change is recognized internationally as one
of the greatest threats to human health through indirect
and direct impacts.
And auditor has a strong interest in this bill due
to its implications for regional community-based climate,
regional and community-based climate change responses.
And because of its implications for people's health, uh,
local government plays a key role in climate change
mitigation, adaptation, resilience, building
by consulting on developing
and implementing land use, transport
and other systems at regional catchment and community level.
Local government acts as a connector,
a really a central connector between national policy
and regional and community level action.
And local government at its best
can establish enduring responses by working with residents,
iwi, hapu, local organizations
and businesses, health agencies,
and others to ensure
that climate change responses are technically, socially
and culturally sound and equitable.
Well-designed local climate change planning can protect
and even improve communities' health.
It can lower inequities
and it can reduce our long-term costs.
These functions of consultation, long-term planning
and implementation are vital to communities,
to our communities and countries present and future.
And we have all seen now where poor planning
and a lack of consideration about a community's broader
health environment
and economic needs have led to climate change,
amplified storm events, driving walls of mud
and forest debris down valleys and into people's home
and homes and businesses,
and destroying critical public infrastructure like drinking
water, wastewater treatment plants, et cetera.
And that's just one example of
where poor planning has serious financial
and human costs to communities.
This bill, however, would restrict it, would have the effect
of restricting local government's abilities
to do the necessary broad consultation, research
and planning to reduce the impact
of climate change on communities.
The proposed core functions include civil defense emergency
management, but no role in efforts to reduce or mitigate
or prevent the emergencies through good planning.
The bill emphasizes council's responsibility for responding
to emergencies, but restricts their ability to plan for
and implement measures that would reduce the severity
of the impacts of natural hazards.
By doing this, the government is demanding an ambulance is
parked at the bottom of the cliff while taking away the
safety barriers, the safe paths,
and the signs at the top of the cliff
that would prevent people from falling in the first place.
Restricting council's, consultation, planning,
and implementation functions at the very least, uh,
or at the very least I should say,
rendering council's utterly confused by poorly
conceived legislation like this that contradicts other
legislative requirements as irresponsible.
Not least of all, because such confusion will do nothing
to reduce council costs as this amendment is intended to do.
Good governance and fiscal responsibility is unlikely when
you unleash confusion through such an obviously rushed
and poorly considered bill like this.
In fact, without well evidenced equitable, socially
and culturally sound, regional planning
and implementation, the cost to communities will inevitably
increase with climate change leading to work more
and worse, infrastructure damage to be repaired, homes,
businesses, and lives lost, communities cut off.
And the buffering effects
that we rely on from healthy inco
ecosystems reduced or lost.
Additionally, this government is failing the country
to produce enduring legislation by removing
ity from public policy.
We see that the single most consistent thread throughout the
government's decisions over the last two years has been
to take every opportunity to remove Maori rights.
And that has consequences for all of us.
For all New Zealanders, Ang is, is fundamental
to New Zealand's constitutional foundation.
It's fundamental to equity and equity equitable responses,
and it's fundamental to good governance.
In this bill, the removal of the requirement for councils
to consider Tik Maori knowledge when appointing council
controlled organization directors
erodes council's cultural competence
and it will weaken the ability of councils
to support communities to develop enduring plans
for their resilience and their health.
In the face of climate change,
individuals cannot protect their health, their homes,
and their livelihoods alone in the face of climate change,
local governance and collective action is a necessity.
However, this bill intends to radically
restrict council's roles in doing this without offering
thought to how else local adaptation, mitigation,
and resilience, uh, measures will be consulted on,
developed or implemented.
Who will do this work if local councils don't?
This bill appears rushed, it appears poorly conceived,
but it has major consequences for all New Zealanders.
So finally, we recommend that the bill is rejected
by select committee, but,
but we also recommend where there are reforms needed
for local government, that there is a much more detailed
and broadly consulted public process carried out,
which includes a non-partisan agreement on a problem
definition for local government.
And that through that we refine the role
of local government rather than ad hoc changes such
are in are in this bill.
Thank you very much and if we've got time
for questions, we are happy to take them. Thank
You, my colleagues.
I have one questiony. I have look, thanks.
Uh, one, just one question, which is a, a large part
of this bill is about trying to keep a, a lid on rates.
We've seen rates go up very, very fast,
particularly in the last three years, um, you know,
faster than any time that I was on local government.
Um, I might say. Um,
but how do we do that in a way which you think would work?
Because obviously a lot of people
who are paying those rates are really struggling with them.
Yeah. So what we are recommending is
that there is a much more detailed investigation into the
role of local government and the,
and the difference between rates
and other costs to homeowners and business owners
and and rate payers.
If you can't simply stop spending
and hope that climate change
and its impacts will stop, um, that's just unrealistic.
Climate change is here and it's already having an impact.
It's going to radically impact, uh,
rate payers if we don't do take preventative measures.
And if you restrict the core functions of, um, council
to take preventative measures to, to you, you know,
you're talking about building infrastructure, for example,
in these council measures,
but we've seen across the country
that climate change amplified events hit
infrastructure hard. Yeah, I've got that.
So And so you, so you want to stop you,
you wanna stop rates increasing,
but you don't wanna take any preventative measures around.
And so those things don't go together.
So you can't just, what we're saying is this is ad hoc.
You're saying that we have to ca that we have to,
to look at rates not rising,
but you're not considering the broader drivers of costs
for New Zealand households and businesses and rape is
So, looks like there aren't any more questions.
I would, but I won't. No, that's okay.
Yeah, you wouldn't care. Thank you so much
for submitting today,
Chair. We have,
uh, the next two submitters up here,
but thanks District council be 12 five, ready to go.
You hang on. Is here. What's that? Recreation hotel.
Oh, okay. Sarah's here.
I'm just gonna grab some water. There is water. So there.
Welcome. Welcome, Sarah. Thank you.
We didn't realize you were actually there. I did.
That's good. You should have said
10 minutes for your submission.
Thank you so much for joining us.
Uh, good morning Madam Chair
and members of the select committee.
Uh, my name is Sarah Murray
and I'm the Chief Executive of Recreational Tua.
I appear before you today on behalf of recreational Tua,
the professional association
and industry body re representing the collective voice
of recreation in New Zealand.
Our mission is enhancing wellbeing through recreation
and we work across New Zealand supporting our members, many
of whom work for local government.
From large metropolitan councils, managing extensive park
and community facility networks through
to small rural authorities struggling
to maintain a single aquatic facility.
We welcome the opportunities
to submit on the local government system improvements
amendment bill.
We acknowledge the government's intent to address rates,
affordability and fiscal discipline.
However, recreation Alterra is gravely concerned
that several aspects
of this bill risk undermining council's ability
to deliver the essential outcomes communities need.
We are here today because local government is the single
biggest investor in recreation, play,
and sports infrastructure,
spending over 1.3 billion annually on facilities
and services crucial to community life.
Our primary opposition lies in the proposal
to remove the four aspects of wellbeing, social, cultural,
economic, and environmental.
From the purpose of local government
wellbeing we submit is not an optional extra,
it's the foundation of community life.
Recreation is not discretionary, it's not a nice to have,
but a fundamental contributor to New Zealand's physical
and mental health, social cohesion, youth development
and climate resilience.
Narrowing the purpose of local government
to focus merely on cost effective service delivery
as the bill proposes, will inevitably shift focus
and funding away from crucial investments such as parks,
libraries, cemeteries, recreation facilities, and the arts.
These investments are easy targets when councils face fiscal
pressure, but their absence actively enro erodes the social
and cultural fabric of our communities.
Access to public open space alone,
a critical local government function is consistently ranked
as a key driver of the quality of life
demonstrably reducing healthcare costs
and increasing physical activity.
So we strongly urge the committee
to retain the wellbeing purpose in the local government Act
2002, uh, we
likewise oppose the exclusion of symmetries
and crematoria from the bill.
We acknowledge positively
that the bill explicitly recognizes reserves, libraries,
museums, and recreational facilities as core services.
This is an affirmation
that recreation is indeed essential, not discretionary.
However, we we're de deeply concerned
by the inexplicable exclusion of cemeteries
and crematoria from this core services list.
This exclusion is inconsistent with the burial
and cremation act 1964,
which obliges territorial authorities to provide cemeteries.
Cemeteries and crematoria are also not optional amenities.
They are essential services, they're required by law
and they're also fundamental to community wellbeing
within our organization.
Recreation Alter, uh, sits the New Zealand cemeteries
and Crematoria Collective Naro Tu a network
representing professionals managing these spaces.
Um, and that network would tell you,
and we tell you also that these are
absolutely critical facilities.
They provide dignity and death for families in whanau.
They honor cultural
and spiritual traditions, especially for ma Maori Pacifica
and migrant communities.
And they preserve community heritage in Whakapapa,
excluding them creates legislative inconsistency,
sends a damaging message that they are optional
and diminishes their vital cultural
and spiritual significance as places of remembrance
and connection to ua.
This perpetuates a history of neglect
and underinvestment investment in this sector.
The New Zealand Crematory, cemeteries
and Crematoria Collective
and Recreation urge that cemeteries
and crematoria be explicitly recognized
as core local government services.
Furthermore, we call on this government
to take a strategic holistic approach
to modernizing the outdated legislative framework governing
burial, cremation and local government.
Without this recognition
and national standards, communities risk, inequitable access
to dignified burial cremation on the issue
of financial sustainability and accountability.
Uh, the recreation sector currently faces severe
financial strains.
Most councils are nearing debt ceilings, grappling
with climate adaptation costs, and dealing with inflation
and high energy costs,
particularly those running aquatic facilities
that rely on LPG heating.
To address these financial realities,
we support the principle of increasing transparency
through activity based reporting.
To ensure this reporting is meaningful,
we recommend the inclusion
of recognized industry specific benchmarking tools such
as yardstick for parks and recreation.
Benchmarks should include metrics like accessibility.
For example, the percentage
of residents within 500 meters of green space.
And also metrics around facility condition
for symmetries be benchmarks should cover
capacity planning and affordability.
Regarding funding mechanisms, the bill clarifies
that third party contributions can offset de
development contributions.
Recreation alter strongly recommends this provision be
explicitly extended to cover operational expenditure such
as energy staffing
and MA maintenance explicitly allowing development
contributions to offset both capital
and operating costs would be a vital step towards unlocking
more sustainable provision.
We submit that the bill overlooks important
systemic issues as well.
While we appreciate the focus on affordability,
framing this bill narrowly as a response
to rate payer costs fails
to address the deeper enduring challenges
faced by local government.
The 2023 review into the future for local government called
for five fundamental shifts strengthened democracy,
a wellbeing focus, treaty partnerships,
genuine central local partnership and equitable funding.
This bill, instead of building on these findings, opts
to narrow the purpose of local governments centralized
control and avoid funding reform.
We believe this is a huge missed opportunity.
We recommend that the bill be aligned with the future
for local government review findings, particularly
concerning funding reform.
Local government funding mechanisms need to be reformed,
including exploring, sharing GST on rates,
creating dedicated climate adaptation funds
and requiring crown contributions to local mandates.
We must always, we must also recognize climate adaptation is
a core local government role, intrinsically linked to parks,
recreation, and cemetery provision.
So in conclusion, recreational supports improvements
and accountability and affordability.
However, the local government system improvements amendment
bill must not compromise the crucial elements
that sustain our communities, namely, wellbeing, democracy,
and essential services.
We strongly urge the select committee to amend the bill
to retain the wellbeing purpose in the local government.
Act 2002, recognize recreation, infrastructure
and services as well as cemeteries
and crematoria as essential services.
And importantly, to address essential long-term issues
relating to funding, benchmarking and democratic renewal.
Recreation play in remembrance are
vital to New Zealand's future.
They underpin health, cohesion, resilience, and dignity.
Narrowing the role of local government undermines
these critical outcomes.
We ask the committee to empower councils
to continue providing the spaces
and services that keep communities active, healthy,
resilient, and connected.
Uh, thank you for your time and consideration
and um, if there's time, I'm happy to take any questions.
Time for one quick question if all has one,
Sarah, we've had a lot of those.
Um, thanks for that. We've had a lot of those,
um, sort of comments.
More money wanted. You got that,
but I'm not hearing also councils taking some responsibility
for saying actually we could be
more efficient and effective.
And I know there's, and I've been
through many budget processes, you know,
but it seems like it's all somebody else's problem to fix.
Is this something that needs to be a bit of two way?
Oh, absolutely. And um,
and I hope that didn't come from the submission
because that is not our suggestion now.
Not necessarily yours, but others as well.
Our, our our, so what we're asking for here
and what suggesting is that the um, the significant
and um, very useful piece of work that was undertaken
and published last year around the future
for local government is really, um, considered as, um,
underpinning, um, this bill
and the approach that, um,
that this government chooses to take.
So, um, this is not about, uh, central government, uh,
being solely responsible
or, um, providing all of the funding
for these essential services and councils.
It's about having a, um, a better
and more equitable, uh, split in system so
that we set up councils to succeed.
'cause they are not set up to succeed at the moment.
They are set up, uh, to fail. And we need to change that.
And you as a government have a responsibility, um,
to support that through, um,
the choices you make with this bill.
Thank you for joining us today, Sarah.
Appreciate your submission. You
Next we have Wellington Community Justice project.
They're not Online. They're not online.
We, we'll go to Queenstown Lakes District Council.
They're on online.
Yeah, it's coming Now
turn on the camera
O'clock.
Welcome.
Welcome. Thank you. You've got 10 minutes.
Okay. Thank you. Uh, Queenstown Lakes district is one
of the fastest growing districts in the country.
In New Zealand's most sought
after premier visitor destination.
At peak times, there are 2.25 visitors per
resident in the district.
More than doubling the population of our district, due
to the pressures of growth
and tourism, our district has taken the approach
to getting the basics right and its long term plan.
The approach pri uh, prioritized essential infrastructure
and maintaining a consistent level of service instead
of taking on discretionary projects.
As shown in DIA's council profile QLDC allocated
89%
of its 2024 capital expenditure towards water
eroding related activities with much
of the remainder going towards community facilities.
This approach aligns strongly
with the behaviors this bill looks to encourage.
But even after a council explicitly prioritize the basics,
first rates rises when necessitated
to ensure the district continues to function.
This demonstrates that the lack of financial dis uh,
fiscal discipline and broad purpose
of local government is not the primary driver
of rates rises,
but rather increasing capital costs
previous underinvestment in the inability of
for local government to utilize a variety of funding
and financing tools to ensure growth pays for growth.
This is why QLDC has been a strong supporter
of the Regional deals program,
but does not support the proposed change
to local government laid out in this bill.
Changing the purpose will not address the fundamental issues
and distracts from more concrete
and tangible solutions that are needed to address
cost pressures for local government
and New Zealand's freight paths.
Refocusing the purpose of local government councils are the
closest form of government to the people.
They have deep community ties that can give vocal, uh,
give voice to local issues.
And narrow focus of local government runs the risk
of limiting council's ability to address issues raised
through the democratic process
and minimize the role councils play as an enabler
of community and environmental development efforts.
Many, many councils create partnerships with the community
as well as central government.
And most of that work by the community is done on
a volunteer basis.
This bill puts that at risk.
In response to those concerns,
QLEC recommends a more holistic approach to the purpose
of local government that acknowledges territorial author's
role as a key partner in creating
and delivering local solutions.
That the proposed purpose of local government, section 10 C,
is amended to support sustainable local economic
growth and development.
And council supports the recognition of the needs
of future communities when providing infrastructure
and calls for greater recognition throughout the act.
Such as in section 1 0 1 2 B.
The Legal risk Council also recommends that the definition
of cost effective in the proposed purpose
of the local government, um,
for local government is altered.
This is to acknowledge council considers a variety
of criteria when making decisions such as environmental,
community, social equity,
and intergenerational considerations.
Having a sole requirement on the focus
of cost effectiveness effectiveness runs the risk
of opening council to legal risk
and challenge by well sourced parties looking
to influence decision making processes.
Legislative certainty, responding to
and contributing towards reforms
and legislative changes requires resource
and disrupts long-term planning process.
Like any service provider councils require legislative
certainty to focus on increasing efficiencies
and to plan QLEC requests
that the government more explicitly consider the
administration and
and disruption costs of the sector
when carrying out reforms.
Government can provide more certainty to councils
through this process by explicitly stating the transition
period for the amended purpose of local government
and for consideration of council timelines such
as long-term plan and annual planning when
setting a transition period.
Other points clarification.
The standardized code of conduct conduct is complemented
with, uh, is complemented with training
and development for opportunities for elected members.
Changes to broad standing orders model can be changed
through a 75% threshold
to ensure councils can adapt the model
to local context if required.
And QLDC strongly agrees with fostering the free exchange
of information, but request clarification on conditions
which are reasonably necessary
regarding proposed amendment section 42, 42, 2 H
two, such as conditions such as commercial sensitivity
or privacy may qualify withholding.
And again, counsel does not support the repeal
of section 53 7.
The consideration of the relevance
of ARI when identifying skills, knowledge,
and experience provide for directors
as we feel this will have no effect on, uh,
the financial burden of our rates funds.
So with that, thank you
for reading our submission. I'm open to questions.
Thank you Mayor Lewis, any questions? Vani?
Sorry I keep mispronouncing your name, so apologies. Vani.
Thank you Madam Chair. And thank you very
much for your submission.
I wonder if you had any comment on, um, the,
the what's included in terms of core services
and whether to your mind that makes sense in terms of what,
you know, the community needs and what you respond to.
Yeah, look, from our point of view, they're too narrow.
I'll probably put a question back to you.
I don't know if you don't answer a question
with a question is tourism, of course service?
Mm. Uh, we're about
to spend 1.5 billion in capital works
over the next 10 years.
700 and, oh, sorry, 2.2 billion.
Um, 747 billion of that is in
for tourism related infrastructure.
That's capital. And we spend probably another
5.4 million in opex.
Do we stop that? Queenstown,
the tourism jewel of New Zealand.
And, and do you have numbers on how,
what the economic benefit is that that
Equates? Oh, well, we provide
1.4 billion in, um,
economic GDP for the country.
I think you collect over 400 million in GST loan from us.
So this is the sort of stuff you are putting at risk.
Andy, uh, Just one, one quick question.
Um, Glen, uh, one of the fastest growing parts
of the country, um, for a, a very, very long period of time.
You said growth, pay for growth,
you mentioned regional deals as well.
Um, how has your growth paying for growth in terms of the,
your collection of dcs, et cetera,
is the regime working for you?
Is, is growth actually paying
For growth? So obviously
the development determines when they do the
development, as you're well aware and Andy, um,
we collect roughly between 27 to 30%, 30%
of our capital outlay every year
because we're growing so fast.
Um, look, I know there's moves to change from dcs
to development levies.
We've been working with the government on that.
We're not too sure that that will help us out as much
as we'd like, but, um, yeah, it's just
'cause we're growing so fast
and we're, we're, we're effectively a, a finance company for
financing all the infrastructure we have
to put in through debt.
Yeah, so look, my my question was, are you getting as much
as you should be getting for growth related infrastructure?
And are there any barriers in terms
of the way in which legislation works,
which are preventing you from getting
what you think you should be getting?
Uh, the barriers are probably the case law built up since
1991, where we've got
to take a very conservative approach when it comes
to collecting development contributions.
Um, look, we'd like to collect more,
but as I said earlier in my submission, we are a very, uh,
judicious, uh, district.
And if you had a look at the case law,
I'm pretty sure QLDC pops up quite a bit,
You know, thanks for that.
All, all the best too. Thanks
Very much for joining us today.
Thank you. Cheer. All right.
Do we go down list, social link or do we go social link to
Thank you. Welcome.
Welcome. And thank you for joining us today.
And, uh, you have, uh, uh, 10 minutes,
uh, in your submissions.
Great. So,
and thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Liz Davies
and I'm the Chief Executive of Social Link to hoori,
the umbrella or the peak organization supporting the social
community sector in the Western Bay of Plenty.
Uh, we represent over 1500 organizations
and individuals working every day
to strengthen the wellbeing of communities.
So I'm here today to express social link strong opposition
to the proposed changes to section 10 of the bill,
which would remove the four pillars
of community wellbeing from the local government Act 2002,
uh, local government was established to meet the needs
of the communities that they serve.
These needs are broad brush
and summed up in the four pillars of wellbeing.
Social, economic, environmental, and cultural.
Local government has never ever been just about
roads rates in rubbish.
Local councils are expected by communities
and by legislation to provide
and support a wealth of services
and facilities from urban regeneration,
local economic development, environment protection,
local roads, sports fields,
and community hubs, events, and many more.
All of these come under the four wellbeings.
They, they're four pillars providing a platform for livable,
vibrant, productive, flourishing communities.
Removing these pillars from legislation may end up limiting
local government's ability to meet these and other needs.
Councils have robust consultation processes
that ensure communities' voices
are heard when setting plans, priorities, and budgets.
And local communities want more control over their
destinies, not less.
If the four wellbeings are removed,
council may no longer have the legislative backing
to respond to what communities actually want.
In addition, if we strip away the wellbeings,
we risk turning councils into service contractors focused on
cost alone, not on creating places where people belong,
thrive, and participate.
And we're also concerned about the bill's proposed new focus
on local economic growth and development.
While economic prosperity is important,
it cannot be the sole measure of success.
A strong economy doesn't automatically
mean a strong community.
Have we focused on cost efficiency and economic return.
We risk neglecting the social connections,
cultural heritage, and environmental stewardship
that makes communities truly resilient.
We acknowledge the government's concerns about rising rates
and fiscal discipline.
Many rate payers, especially those on fixed incomes,
as struggling with cost of living pressures.
However, removing the four wellbeings will
not address this issue.
Most rate increases are driven by ongoing
and increasing infrastructure needs
and past underinvestment, not by so-called nice to haves.
And one person's nice to haves is another's bottom line
of necessary infrastructure
to create a flourishing community where everyone belongs.
The nice to have term is very subjective
and not helpful in determining
what councils should or should not do.
The majority of local government spending already
focuses on core services.
The real problem is the limited revenue tools
available to councils.
The government wants to improve fiscal sustainability.
It should look at expanding funding
and financing options,
not narrowing the purpose of local government.
I recently went to the opening of the, um,
Maryvale Community Center
and one of to long's most deprived communities.
It was a long time coming,
but this center is going
to be a game changer for the community.
It will deliver on all four wellbeings,
sustain the community with Kai, offer training, mentoring
and guidance to nurture young people into employment,
education and training.
Provide a space for community connect connection,
help rebuild people's lives with counseling and care
and connect people to their culture.
This bill may have resulted in this center not being built,
which would've been such a significant loss on
so many different levels for this community.
In conclusion, the removal
of the four wheel beings would send the wrong signal
to councils that community, environment, culture,
and social cohesion no longer matter as much
as cost efficiency.
We believe all four wellbeings must remain in the
purpose of local government.
They're the compass that ensures local government decisions
are grounded in the values
and aspirations of the people they serve.
But thank you very much.
Questions. I'll ask one then.
Um, I'm not forcing you question.
Oh, look, it's always good to have a bit of,
bit of, uh, to and fro.
Um, one of the things you said in your, um, submission
of why, why you said most of the, um, uh, most
of the spending is on, uh,
necessary infrastructure, et cetera.
You've also said, having said
that there may maybe some instances
of poorly thought out spending by local government.
Have you got any thoughts about how we get a better,
because all this is about getting better discipline in terms
of the expenditure, and I, you know, acknowledge
that the vast majority of local government spending is
necessary, but sometimes it's not.
And some councils in particular color
that you've got any suggestions about how we might do
that in a way which gives rate payers better value
for the money that gets spent.
What, uh, in terms of not producing what some people,
I mean, I, this is so subjective, this is, it's
A better pro better processes, I guess I'm asking for.
Yeah, and I mean, in term, well, I mean,
I think most councils have pretty robust procurement,
uh, processes.
Um, I mean, I I I'm sure it varies.
Um, and I suppose it's, it's,
but it's also, uh, the level of service that's provided.
Um, it's very subjective in terms
of whether it should be higher
or lower depending on the community and the needs.
And, and I do take on board what the mayor of, um,
Queenstown Lakes was saying as well is
that it's not just about cost efficiency that needs
to be taken into account.
So it's, I think it's quite a complex area.
Sorry, I don't probably haven't answered your pass there.
Sorry. No,
That's okay. That's
okay. Hey, thank you so much for joining us today.
Thank you. I appreciate Your time. Thank
You. Thank you. Your time.
Bye.
Bye. Next we have Portico District Council.
Uh, thank you our portico district council.
Um, thank you for joining us.
You have 10 minutes for your submission.
You can use all of it, uh, for your submission,
or you can leave some time for questions,
but it's luck of the draw.
Sometimes they may not have questions, so there you go.
Uh, um, thank you very much for the opportunity
to speak to our submission.
Um, I'm joined, uh, by, uh, mark Fryer, uh, manager
of strategy and development.
And I'm Stacy Lewis, CEO for Panke District Council.
Um, so just firstly, uh, in terms of the overall intent
of the bill, um,
and looking at opportunities to, uh, improve, uh,
local government, uh, uh,
we support this transparency is a good thing.
Um, we value that
and there are a lot of things that we do
currently that enable that.
Um, we also hope that there is opportunities
for efficiencies to be built into the legislative change.
Um, particularly if you look at the scope
around long-term planning audit functions, um, we see that
as a real opportunity, um, in terms
of removing the wellbeings, uh,
and focusing more narrowly on certain service provisions.
A little bit concerned there in terms of, you know, the lack
of clarity around those other services that we do provide,
such as regulatory services, A key key function
that we provide through economic development.
You know, some councils have pathways to work through mes,
task for jobs, et cetera,
and it just feels like it's, um,
not adequately covered in, in the bill.
And, and the fear is that there'll be a misunderstanding
of really what local government provides, uh, the community.
Um, also in terms of our long-term focus,
it's really important to, to acknowledge that
and make sure that's, uh, front and center.
You know, recently we've developed our Eastern Bay spatial
plan, regional economic development strategy, linking
that in with our, uh, infrastructure strategy
and our long-term plan.
Uh, these are, these are fundamental documents
that provide vision
and certainty for the district around the future growth
and development, and really transitioning
the district over time.
And they're such an important function that we do,
and it takes really effective leadership
and integration, um, which is front and center for us,
and to feel like it's, uh, potentially not, uh,
supported enough in the, in the, in the changes in the bill.
Um, also another ch another challenge for us, uh, is around
the lack of ability to get income through government land.
75% of our is dock land, which is non rateable.
Um, and
therefore, if we're looking at the affordability
of our council to be able to function
and provide rates, there's a massive proportion
of our district that we actually get no income from,
which does have a link to us having
to provide certain services to help support the community.
Um, so some consideration around that, um,
because I know there is a desire and a function
and a view to look at things like rate capping, um,
to help control costs.
Uh, um, I worked in New South Wales
for 16 years at a local government there, um,
and rate capping was applied.
We had to make a special rate variation application
through I a, um,
and increase the rates by 50 cent, 50% over three years
because rate capping didn't work.
It, it constrained our ability to be able
to be financially sustainable in the long term.
Um, and it is an example of the challenges that
rate capping can have on the ability to, um,
provide essential services
or services to the community that, uh,
the council is there for.
Um, the other thing with audit as a small council, you know,
we find that audit is, plays a really important role
for us in terms of giving assurance
and, uh, opinion about how we are operating
and functioning in line with legislation
and trying to build trust between us and the community.
However, it's become a really inefficient
and burdensome process and highly costing the community.
I don't think it's fit for purpose.
It needs an overhaul to still maintain the purpose
of providing assurance, but in a much more efficient way.
It's costing us more than it is
to provide some certain infrastructure in parts of our, um,
community and, um, feel it's just, it's not fit for purpose
and would see that as a real opportunity to, um,
look at efficiencies to help us, um, provide
positive outcomes for the community.
Uh, happy to take any grace.
So, um, first, um, Andy Foster. Oh,
Okay. Well, I was gonna say you,
well, if you wanna,
If you wanna actually start with Van,
that's very kind of you, Andy.
Thank you. Thank you both.
Um, and thank you very much for your submission.
I think you made a really useful point in terms of, um,
required regulatory services
that are directed under other pieces of legislation.
Um, and I wondered if you could just give us a sense
of whether you have an idea of the proportion in terms
of capacity of time
and resource that's spent on those other services.
Yeah, it's a, it's a large part of our business that we,
we look after obviously building control, resource consents,
animal control, parking.
It's a massive part of our organization.
Um, and for example, we had the highest number of, uh,
residential builds last 12 months.
Um, for a small council,
that is a big imposter on our small team to be able
to provide those and meet those outcomes that are required
for, um, the community.
And it's really important 'cause we
want to keep that growth going.
We want to keep people coming into the district
and providing a really great service for them, um, to want
to continue to engage with us.
Um, so yeah, that's, it's a,
I can't give you the exact figures, um,
but it is a massive part of our business
and it is a part, part of the business
that the community engage with animal control.
You would've noticed, you know, with the recent publication
of what's been happening in Auckland, um, you know, it's,
it's not dissimilar here except we have the added
disadvantage of trying to, uh, manage horses.
Horses is a, is another issue for us in, in our lovely town.
So, um, you know, there are nuances amongst the differences
of council that would require different resources
to be applied to these types of services.
And a blanket approach won't, won't cover that.
So yeah, it's, it's, thank you for raising that.
That was, uh, a good point.
Thank you Annie Stein.
Yeah, just one question. Um, you've raised audit, um,
and the cost of audit and, uh, I've heard that from a number
of particular small councils that it's very large.
So I'd be interested in what proportion of your budget, uh,
that is, but also are there areas in which we can look at
changes to rules, regulations that are imposed on you
as a council where we could actually make your job easier
and therefore you're able to deliver what you need
to deliver, uh, more cost effectively?
Yeah, thanks. Um, audit for us, it, it,
it varies depending on if it's the LTP audit
or if it's an annual report audit.
Um, but you know, it's upwards of the range of around 2%
of our income rates, rates income to, to pay
for, for delivering an audit.
Um, and, and that's, that's a significant cost
and that doesn't take into account the staff's time
to work on providing the information. Uh,
That, thank you for that.
Are there any other areas which you think we could, um,
be helpful in, uh, reducing some of the impost
that central government opposes on you in terms of costs?
Um, yeah, obviously the, the,
it's probably a little bit different to this,
but resource consent applications, the, the, the time
to get resource consents
for certain construction activities can be drawn out
and, uh, costly.
Um, so those provisions be, again, be able
to streamline those to make it more efficient
and effective, um, would be fantastic.
Um, I do support the, the notion of, you know,
looking at these national standards for wastewater discharge
to hopefully streamline those, uh,
activities is, is welcomed.
Um, and we've been working closely with on that so that,
that will help as well.
Um, but as I mentioned, other, other things
that we find quite challenging is, you know, 75%
of our land is, is non rateable.
Um, you know,
even if there was a small allocation associated
to government land, um, that would go a long way to helping
and providing another financial lever
to provide services to the community.
Okay. Are we done timewise,
I've gotta quickly follow that one up.
Yep. So just quickly on that one, on the dock land, um,
does it actually impose cost on you
and can you quantify that cost?
Um, yes. It doesn't impose cost particularly, uh,
the impact of roading infrastructure,
stormwater infrastructure, and the likes.
Um, you know, there, there is runoff, there is us needing
to maintain as a small council, covering a large area, um,
you know, some of these roads that are providing access
to properties that are in close proximity
or, um, require extra work to be able
to maintain the runoff, et cetera from, uh,
those neighboring properties.
How to quantify it. I'm not sure exactly what that is,
that number is, but, um,
we could definitely work on coming up with an estimate of
what that could be, but also not just stock land is
obviously education land, um, all those other lands
that are in, in, in, in the district itself,
which is not ratable.
So, um, yeah, would be helpful to have that consideration.
Thank you so much for making submissions today.
Ah, thank you for hearing us. Okay then.
Okay, so next we have New Zealand Forest
Owners Association.
Elizabeth, thank you so much for joining us today.
You've got 10 minutes. Oh, great. Thank you.
Um, so, uh, Koto, um, I'm the CEO
of the Forest Owners Association.
Um, I know I've presented to the committee before,
but just, uh, for the record,
we represent timber producers here in New Zealand.
Um, so I've got a membership that covers, um, about
$6.35 billion of export value, um,
including our administration of the levy.
Um, and, uh, we have about 8,500 people
who are directly employed in forest harvesting,
silviculture engineering and management roles.
Um, plantation forests play a significant public good role
in helping New Zealand meet its emissions targets,
but also through meeting, uh, the growing demands
for bioenergy high value products
and, um, other important building materials.
Um, look, the, the reason we wanted to talk
to you about the, um, amendment bill today
is we're concerned that the review of the purposes
of local councils
and local government could actually exclude biosecurity, um,
without strong biosecurity practice.
Um, the assets that I've just talked about in terms
of our forest estate are very much at risk.
Um, we work quite closely
with local government on biosecurity protection, whether
that's pest and predator management
through predator free programs
or, uh, the, the wider programs around
mostly local government is actually focused on, uh,
established pests and, and pathogens.
Um, and they're a really important partner alongside
biosecurity New Zealand and, um,
and ourselves in, in industry and communities around looking
after our state.
The the other thing that, uh, we, we have
to have consideration of with local government is, um,
they are often asset owners as well.
Um, and so they've got skin in the game for, for lack
of a better expression, um,
and that that connection to their asset management
and our biosecurity protections means them having a,
a mandated role in that space is critical to
how we form those partnerships
around biosecurity management.
Um, the other thing councils do well is connect
that rural urban divide.
So in the admin, in, in the administration
and predator free programs as an example, um, councils, uh,
I'll use, uh, Dunedin as an example.
Dunedin City Council's Halo program is something
that forestry companies I work
with have invested directly in.
Uh, the, the council has a convening role in
that space in bringing together predator free, you know,
industry groups like ours and, um,
and those, those investors to facilitate
that community management both across rural
and urban areas within Dunedin
and Otago of the Predator issue.
Um, we're really keen that that description
of core services 11 a be amended to make sure
that they include that range of activities
and services that councils undertake in terms of biosecurity
and asset protection,
because that asset protection
is a critical public good element
that's an important role of local government.
Um, I, I have more examples there,
but I'm, I'm conscious of, I've only got the 10 minutes, so,
um, if there were any questions that you had, I'm, I'm happy
to open it up to those, uh, Vania Walters,
Uh, thank you very much for your submission.
You would've heard the prior submission from as well, um,
where they talked about, um, regulatory requirements
and other legislation and regs.
I'm just wondering whether you are aware
of any other statutory provisions
or regulatory provisions in the biosecurity area that, um,
make requirements of, of local council?
Yeah, I, I, I guess the question here is, um,
you know, the Biosecurity Act does have specific
requirements on, on local councils, um, in, in the same way
that the Resource Management Act will, will have some, um,
I guess complimentary requirements, um, to an extent.
Uh, when you, when you look at things like national
direction, um,
there there's gonna be a role in
council plans for these things.
I think our concern and,
and maybe this could just be made clearer in, in terms of
how, um, the amendments are proposed.
Our concern is if it's not included in the core purposes,
then does, does that mean it's something
that gets deprioritized in terms of
that day-to-day management
and in terms of how councils are then doing their planning?
So absolutely understand that there are other, uh,
requirements in legislation.
The local government act though is the, the underpinning
that's the, that's the, the key document
that gives councils their marching orders.
And our concern is if there's not enabling provision in
terms, you know, we we're asking
councils to prioritize, right?
Mm-hmm. And we are really keen that through
that prioritization, that biosecurity
and asset protection is part of that prioritization.
Um, I think quickly as well.
So in terms of things like rating, we also want this
to be a consideration.
Um, you know, we've got some proposals around how, uh,
we could see, uh, rating working through,
through the amendments, um, to local government, um,
enabling legislation and regulations.
Um, we'd be particularly keen
to see differential rating capped,
but an allowance made for, um, for groups
to get together and put targeted rates towards specific, um,
environmental and infrastructure problems.
In terms of that, if you don't have that kind
of enabling overall provision around the fact
that local government does have a role in this space, um,
then, you know, if for instance, uh, we had a range
of rural com community members
and business people that wanted to get together
and do a targeted rate
around solving a particular biosecurity problem, then I,
I guess that's, that's not something, that's not a facility
that could then be used.
And that kind of gets back to that convening role
that local government can be really important
in having in this space.
Mm-hmm. Around like collective asset
protection at the local level. Thank
You, Andy Foster.
Yeah. Look, um, good that you touched on rates there,
because one I've heard quite a lot about in from about the
forestry sector, I'm not quite clear on how forestry, uh,
uh, trees themselves are rated vis-a-vis the way in which,
um, crops are rated.
So if you, you know, I, I I, I understand that one is,
one is not two effectively improvement on the land,
but also forestry produces a very little impact
on the land for a large period of time.
And then what's, particularly when it's harvest,
it produces a lot of impact on, on, on the infrastructure.
But is there a good nexus
between the costs the forestry imposes on councils
and the rates which are charged?
Well, one of the reasons that we're proposing a,
a ratings differential cap is
because right now we've seen, um, councils, I,
I guess in some cases we feel
that councils are regulating us by using local rating.
And often those rates are not actually going back into the
infrastructure that's, that's being amended.
So I have foresters right now
that are paying a hundred percent more rate, for instance,
in y than they were a year ago.
But they're also having to pay to fix up the roads, um,
where they have operations underway.
Um, so it's, it's effectively layering the cost onto, uh,
foresters and, and farmers who have forestry.
Um, I'm really keen that we work together.
So look, we all understand that councils need
to be able to create infrastructure.
Um, I, I think there's an important consideration in
councils being able to go to rate payers
and us have other tools in the toolkit.
Then we are just gonna rate quite heavily some
parts of the rural sector.
Um, and, and I guess our concern
with a ratings cap coming in is
that we could see the rates actually driven out
to the rural sector and away from, uh, v voters in the
central, um, districts.
Um, we've been working with the chambers of commerce on this
as well, because the ratings differential is actually an
issue across multiple sectors.
Yes. Um, and,
and I think there's, there's a really, um, in terms of
that ongoing management cost to forestry, I mean,
forestry also gives back quite a lot in terms of the,
you know, air we breathe, uh, clean water, uh, biodiversity.
Um, and, and we undertake through our operations,
pretty intensive biosecurity operations.
So, you know, we're doing a lot of work as a, for instance
with Save the Kiwi
because we've got lower predator numbers in our forest,
and we're able to reintroduce Native Kiwi, um,
at pretty high stocking levels.
And they, and they love it in the forest.
And then we harvest very carefully around the Kiwi.
Um, so they're, they're able
to have a net gain in their local populations
because we're introducing them into forest areas.
So, and we, we, the, the amenities that Forest can offer
to a community, I, I think, need to be reflected in the way
that we think about rating them ongoing.
And that's something that we are happy.
Like I say, we're happy to work with councils on,
and particularly if we could get a targeted rating mechanism
that would give us the ability to say, Hey, we can see
that there's an issue over here,
and we all wanna make sure that we're paying our bit into
that, and that we're getting the service we want to get out
of local government in, in that space.
Let's work together with other businesses
to set something up where, um, we can, we can have a say
and business and government can work in partnership
to solve some of these problems.
Thank you on that. Now we've gone over time.
Thank you so much. Thank you very much. Appreciate it.
Uh, next is McKenzie District
Council via Zoom.
Uh, we can, here
I'm just coming, I'm just coming through.
I'm just checking if you can hear me and you can see me,
We can hear you and we're Yes, we can see you now.
Okay, great. Welcome. And you have 10 minutes.
Great. Um, so I'll just introduce myself and Karen.
So, k Kiara Koto.
I'm Angela Esto,
and I'm the chief executive
of the McKenzie District Council. And Karen,
Sorry, sorry, we can't see you. We can see Karen.
Okay. Um,
Yeah, the, yep, almost you almost there.
You, you appeared and you disappeared.
It's not allowing me to turn myself on.
Oh, we're There. We're sorry. Apologies for that.
So, um, just to go back, Kota, I'm Angela stay.
I'm the Chief executive of the McKenzie District Council,
and also online is Karen Morgan.
She is our, um, mayor of currently the acting mayor
of the McKenzie District Council.
And we'd like to thank you for the opportunity
to be able to speak.
Um, in summary, we support the intent of the bill
to improve efficiency and transparency,
but as a small tourism, um, heavy, um,
with significant drive through tourists, um,
we urge the committee to cons consider the unique pressures
that the McKenzie district faces, um, some
of our local realities that we have to work with.
Mackenzie is a very small district
with only 5,500 rate payers, yet we host one
of the highest visitor to rate pair ratios in New Zealand,
um, using the current MB data.
Um, it's 131 visitors to every one resident.
The national average is really, um, seven to one,
and even Queenstown sits at 85 to one.
Um, the problem is that many
of these visitors are day trippers who drive
through from Christchurch through to Queenstown, um,
and they drive through.
They use our infrastructure, which are roads, public, um,
toilets, um, wastewater systems, um, systems,
but they contribute very little
economically to our district.
Um, this place is a immense pressure, um,
on our small district
and our council to be able to deliver services
and funding, um, especially for mixed use infrastructure.
Um, our Lake
Tepa wastewater treatment plant requires a significant
capital investment, a cost that would drive debt upwards,
and a cost that is onerous for a small community.
Um, we've taken steps in this year to actually start
to help ourselves, um, to really target some
of the high tourism spots
and to really make sure that we do, uh,
extract some value from the, um, the drive through tourist
by, um, having a user pay toilet system in place.
Um, so we urge you to consider that context.
Um, in the light of some of the, um, the purpose definitions
and the core services definitions, um, we are convinced
or we are concerned that the bill narrows the scope
of local government, removing the forward wellbeings
and defining core services to ri to rigidly risk,
sidelining vital functions like tourism, housing
and economic development,
and even community development as well.
Section ten's wording on economic
development is very narrow.
And Section 11 A is incomplete and rigid.
We do believe that the council should retain flexibility
to be able to support local priorities.
Investors invest in drivers of local growth, um,
as they are related to tourism
and as they are related to supporting, um,
growth in our districts.
That means being able to support housing initiatives.
Um, we'd also like to be able to partner meaningfully
with central government through regional deals,
and we'd also like to, um, make sure that we can contribute,
um, and continue to invest in tourism
and tourism related infrastructure so
that we can support the re the regional
tourism, um, growth map.
Um, as highlighted by Minister Upton, drivers
of growth locally mean that we need
to invest in affordable housing initiatives
to drive enough housing, uh, for the workers
that work in various areas.
For example, in tepo, uh, housing, the Airbnb ratio,
um, that is there in Tepo is around 50% of the houses
that are there are actually just Airbnbs.
That that does not include, um, other commercial enterprises
and other, and other commercial, um, operations.
Um, that reduces significantly the amount of housing
that is available for, uh, workers.
Um, we also believe that we do need to continue.
We are in a unique environment
and we do need to continue
to support environmental stewardship.
That means being able to work alongside our local trusts
and to be able to look at contributing into initiatives
that address wilding pine risks
and also initiatives that target pest control
and maintain, um, our local biodiversity.
Um, we would like to see the words provide more scope
for placemaking investment that creates a better environment
for locals and
consequently visitors through the development
of mixed use infrastructure.
There is a risk that as the bill progresses, um,
that the words would be tightened
to close down the tourism investment altogether.
And for us, being able to invest in our RTO,
which does a lot of significant marketing
and, um, contributes towards a tourism growth,
um, that is vital.
Um, moving on to benchmarking and performance.
Bench benchmarking, we believe needs
to reflect local context without it when, uh,
right when people are out there comparing, um, comparisons
between districts, it's misleading
and, um, it risks distorting their decision making.
For districts like ours, seasonal tourism surges
and geographic isolations matter
potentially when they then compare those stats from the
different districts, um, um, that could lead
to inaccurate pictures of efficiency and effectiveness.
Effectiveness, right.
Capping while not legislated, the concept is concerning.
The New South Wales experience with rate capping offers.
A clear warning councils in New Zealand have faced
in New South Wales, have faced deferred maintenance under
investment and infrastructure
and increased debt due to fixed rate caps.
The policy failed to account for inflation population growth
and rising service costs, forcing councils to cut services
and to rely on federal grants.
It also undermined local decision making,
removing flexibility to respond to community needs.
In McKenzie, a blanket cap would be especially damaging.
Our costs are driven by tourism,
the unique alpine conditions
and infrastructure demands that don't fit a one size
or a one size fits all model.
For example, I'll talk about our roading in winter.
We have significant weather events, um,
and we, our road payers, um, have
to fund those snow clearing events, um, largely
because the funding has been cut, uh, from NZTA, um,
also road safety.
We see significant, um, I impacts
of poor tourist driving in winter
and we are having to deal with, um,
supporting emergency responses, um, to be able to deal
to accidents on our roads erodes, um,
regulatory relief and governance.
We support efforts to reduce, um,
outdated compliance burdens,
but we oppose removing to Kang Maori considerations
and CCO appointments relief must uphold t obligations.
We also support extending CCEO terms
for continuity and stability.
In closing, we asked the committee
to preserve local flexibility, avoid narrowing council roles
that would restrict investments in economic development
and tourism reject rates capping based on the clear evidence
from New South Wales
and to support collaborative funding for tourism
and infrastructure, uh, with central governments.
Um, I welcome your questions, Karen.
I just might ask if you would like
to contribute to anything.
So look, I, I support everything that Angela has said.
We have a unique climate and district in the McKenzie.
Um, and it, it isn't, um, an easy place for people
to live, uh, but they want to be here.
Uh, on top of that, the volume of tourists that we, uh, have
through our district, both those staying
and those also passing through, um, they're here
because of the unique environment that we have.
Um, but they do put pressure.
We are expecting, um, with China, recognizing
that they're coming back this summer,
that we will be even further under pressure
as we go into the summer season.
Uh, and if we look at our tar rating in relation to the rest
of New Zealand, um, the average tar rating
for New Zealand is 49, as is 11.
So while our communities, uh, recognize the benefit
that tourism gives, um, they don't want
to be in such a position that they're having to bear the,
the full cost of that.
So we want government to work with us
and have place-based funding, um, to be able to help us
to deliver the goals that our communities want,
but also the goals that, um, the, uh, the, the country
as a whole wants in terms of, um, GDP growth, et cetera.
So, um, all of the points that Angela has has made there,
um, that is, that is the collective response
that's come from our council at large.
Uh, and we would like to, um, to do what we can
and advocate for the Mackenzie, uh, which is why we said
that we would speak at this,
at this select committee hearing.
Uh, thank you Angela and Carol.
We've actually run out of time. We've gone over, actually.
So thank you for joining us today.
No problem. Thank you very much. Do,
Do we have, are we, are we getting this person back?
Community justice? So they've
decided they're an hour behind.
Yeah. So, well, I think we just break. Yeah.
Basically say that they're not here.
So reconvene just before one?
Uh, yeah, if we could,
um, 10 minute break.
10.